---
layout: post
title: Botnet operated from Subotica, Serbia
tags:
 - news
 - hacking
summary: "A local guy has been cought for operating a botnet."
---

A very unlikely event has happened to me, on [this fine
day](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pi_Day). While doing some coding work in [our
new office](http://maps.google.com/maps/place?cid=15788719740598699540), my
grandma has called and told me she heard something on the news about a criminal
being cought in our town, for doing something with a computer virus. His first
name was Attila, and she couldn't hear her last name - thus the assumption it
might have been me.

Of course, it wasn't me.

<div class="img center left">
  <img src="/media/images/random/atiiila.gif" alt="Atila Alaćan"/>
  <br/>
  <em><code>atiiila</code></em>
</div>

[According to RTS](http://www.rts.rs/page/stories/sr/story/135/Hronika/857032)
and [YU eco](http://www.yueco.rs/vest/hronika/uhap-en-haker-iz-subotice),
**Atila Alaćan**, 27, from [Subotica,
Serbia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subotica), has been arrested on suspicion
of *computer fraud* and causing **$ 70k** damage for a Canadian company.

The police is suspecting that [the
guy](http://www.poznanici.com/index.php?p=user_profile&user_id=20116) bought a
virus in 2010, stored it on a rented server, and used it to infect more than
1000 computers worldwide. He then used these zombies to register on various
torrent sites, post fake torrents that look like movies, but instead contain a
virus, and seed them - thus these files would reach a whole mass of dumbass
guys who are naive enough to download soch a thing :)

How did he manage to get money from the Canadian company like this, still not
clear to me. Who is this company anyway? No idea. All I know that Attila was
stupid enough - according to the police - to redirect this money directly to
his bank account. What was he thinking?

Anyway. After doing some researh on the guy, I found out that he used the
**`atiiila`** alias to register on some sites. On [one scam
site](http://infozarada.com/infozarada-nije-reklama.htm), I could even find a
photo that is supposed to be him. He's giving a testimonial on one one of those
nifty MLM schemes.

Anyway, [googling for `atiiila`](http://www.google.com/search?q=atiiila&nfpr=1)
I've found some rather interesting results. His nick is registered on a [Black
Hat SEO
forum](http://www.blackhatworld.com/blackhat-seo/members/7357-atiiila.html),
for instance. Another fairly interesting artifact is an `exe` file named
`atiiila.exe` that shows up in a number of anti-virus site's public definition
list. *Atiiila, are you really that dumb? Did you just give your virus your own
nickname?*

`atiiila`, if you're reading this, I only have one message for you:

    TmV2ZXIgZ29ubmEgZ2l2ZSB5b3UgdXANCk5ldmVyIGdvbm5hIGxldCB5b3UgZG93bg0KTmV2ZXIgZ29u
    bmEgcnVuIGFyb3VuZCBhbmQgZGVzZXJ0IHlvdQ0KTmV2ZXIgZ29ubmEgbWFrZSB5b3UgY3J5DQpOZXZl
    ciBnb25uYSBzYXkgZ29vZGJ5ZQ0KTmV2ZXIgZ29ubmEgdGVsbCBhIGxpZSBhbmQgaHVydCB5b3U=
